doi:1 .1 16/j.polymer.2  5. 5.137 
Does the length of the short chain branch affect the mechanical properties


of linear low density polyethylenes? An investigation based on


films of copolymers of ethylene/1-butene, ethylene/1-hexene and


ethylene/1-octene synthesized by a single site metallocene catalyst


Pankaj Guptaa,1, Garth L. Wilkesa,*, Ashish M. Sukhadiab, Rajendra K. Krishnaswamyb, Mark J. Lambornb, Stephen M. Wharryb, Chung C. Tsob, Paul J. DesLauriersb,


Todd Mansfieldc, Frederick L. Beyerd


aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA 24 61, USA bChevron Phillips Chemical Company, Bartlesville, OK, USA


cProcter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, OH, USA dUS Army Research Laboratory, Aberdeen, MD, USA


Available online 12 July 2  5 
Abstract


Three nearly identical linear low density polyethylene resins based on copolymers of ethylene with 1-butene (B), 1-hexene (H) and


1-octene (O) were utilized to investigate the effect of short chain branch length on the mechanical properties of blown and compression


molded (quenched and slow cooled) films. The content of short chain comononer in the three copolymers was ca. 2.5–2.9 mol% that


corresponded to a density of  .917– .918 g/cm3. Within a given series, the tensile properties of these films do not show any significant


difference at slow deformation rates (up to 51  mm/min), even though the DSC and TREF profiles of ‘H’ and ‘O’ differed slightly in


comparison to ‘B’. However, at higher deformation rates (ca. 1 m/s), the breaking strength of these films was found to increase with


increasing short chain branch length. In addition, the Spencer impact and Elmendorf tear strength of the blown films were also observed to


increase with increasing short chain branch length. Further, dart impact strength and high-speed puncture resistance (5.1 m/s) of 1-octene and


1-hexene based samples was also observed to be higher than that based on 1-butene. The blown films displayed low and comparable levels of


equivalent in-plane birefringence and crystalline orientation by wide angle X-ray scattering. This confirms that the differences in mechanical


properties in the blown film series are not attributable to differences in molecular orientation. The deformation behavior of both the


compression molded and blown films were also investigated in a well-defined controlled regime by analyzing their essential work of fracture.


It was found that the essential work of fracture of films based on 1-hexene and 1-octene was higher than that of films based on 1-butene. While


the origin of these differences in mechanical properties with increasing short chain branch length is not fully understood, the present


investigation confirms this effect to be pronounced at high deformation rates for both the blown and compression molded quenched films.


q 2  5 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.


Keywords: Polyethylene; Short chain branching; Mechanical


1. Introduction


Linear low density polyethylenes (LLDPEs) are made by   32-3861/$ - see front matter q 2  5 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.


doi:1 .1 16/j.polymer.2  5. 5.137 
* Corresponding author. Tel.: C1 54  231 5498; fax: C1 54  231 9511. 
E-mail address: gwilkes@vt.edu (G.L. Wilkes). 1 Current address: Materials R&D, The Dow Chemical Company,


Freeport, 77541, TX, USA. the copolymerization of ethylene and an a-olefin, such as


1-butene, 1-hexene, 1-octene, 4-methyl-1-pentene, etc. The


a-olefin, present in small amounts in the copolymer,


introduces short chain branches (SCB) on the polymer


backbone; for instance, the three particularly common


comonomers, 1-butene, 1-hexene and 1-octene addressed in


this report introduce ethyl, butyl and hexyl branches,


respectively. The primary objective of this study is to


investigate whether the length of the short chain branch


(2.5–2.9 mol%, at a copolymer density of ca.  .917– 
 .918 g/cm3) affects the mechanical properties of LLDPE


Polymer 46 (2  5) 8819–8837 
www.elsevier.com/locate/polymer


P. Gupta et al. / Polymer 46 (2  5) 8819–8837882  films. As will be reviewed below, many studies have


attempted to address this same topic but in doing so, many


important and influential parameterswere not necessarily well


controlled in the respective investigations. We believe the


present report has improved on this aspect aswill be discussed.


LLDPE resins are typically produced using Ziegler Natta


heterogeneous catalysts, whose origins can be traced back to


the late 195 s [1]. However, the resins produced by these


catalysts are characterized by considerable heterogeneity in


their microstructure and melting behavior and are con-


sidered to be a mixture of fractions of polyethylene


copolymers with a range of molecular weights and short


chain branch content. In the mid 199 s, with the commercial


advent of high efficiency single site metallocene catalysts,


narrow molecular weight distribution LLDPEs with con-


siderably more homogenous distribution of short chain


branches were produced. Metallocene-based LLDPE resins


have now been commercialized using various different


catalyst technologies [2–6]. The single site metallocene


catalysts produce copolymers that have much narrower


molecular weight distributions (ca. 2–3) and a greater


uniformity in the distribution of the short chain branching


across the width of the molecular weight distribution


relative to the Ziegler Natta catalyzed systems.


LLDPE resins of all types constitute a major segment of


the polyethylene (PE) blown film market worldwide. It is


known that the mechanical properties of the LLDPE films


are influenced by molecular structural parameters such as


molecular weight, molecular weight distribution in addition


to the amount as well as the short chain branch distribution


(SCBD) across the width of the copolymer molecular


weight distribution. Morphological features such as degree


of crystallinity, intercrystalline connectivity and preferred


orientation are also strongly believed to have an effect of the


mechanical properties of blown LLDPE films [7–19].


Short chain branching critically affects the crystallinity


and thus the morphology and consequently the solid-state


properties of the corresponding LLDPE films. As a result, a


broad range of properties of LLDPEs can be obtained by


varying the amount of SCB and the SCBD. In addition, the


length of the short chain branch may also play an important


role in governing the mechanical properties—the specific


issue that will be addressed in this study. Early on, Cady


[2 ] investigated the effects of the type of short chain


branching (SCB) and SCBD on the dart impact and


Elmendorf tear strength of blown films of LLDPEs based


on 1-butene, 1-hexene and 1-octene that were synthesized


using Zeigler Natta catalyst chemistry. For similar density


and melt flow index, the 1-butene based resins performed


poorly in comparison to those based on 1-hexene and


1-octene, even though it had a more homogenous SCBD.


However, comparison of two different 1-octene based resins


that differed in their SCBD indicated better mechanical


performance for the 1-octene based resin that had a more


homogenous SCBD. No comment was made on the relative


amounts of the short chain branching in each of the resins, %


crystallinity or orientation of the blown films. However, it


was concluded that the combination of the short chain


branch length and a more homogenous SCBD leads to better


mechanical properties of LLDPE blown films. In a similar


study utilizing LLDPE resins based on 1-butene, 1-hexene


and 1-octene that had densities in the range of  .919– 
 .921 g/cm3, melt flow indices of  .9–1 dg/min and


polydispersities of 3.3–4.1, Liu and Baker [21] observed


the impact strength to increase with increasing short chain


branch length. It was suggested that the longer short chain


branches lead to a larger fraction of tie molecules in the


interlamellar region that causes the observed increase in


impact strength. However, in this study as well, both the


comonomer content and the SCBD varied simultaneously,


thereby making the interpretation of the corresponding


effects uncertain. In a third study, Kim and Park [22] observed


a similar trend for Zeigler-Natta catalyzed 1-butene, 1-hexene


and 1-octene based LLDPE blown films that had relatively


larger polydispersities (w6), varying comonomer compo-


sition (4.3, 3.7 and 2.8 mol% of 1-butene, 1-hexene and


1-octene, respectively) and varying branch density (21, 17 and


13 CH3/1    C for 1-butene, 1-hexene and 1-octene based


resins, respectively). The differences in the dart impact and


Elmendorf tear strengths of the blown films based on the three


resins were attributed to the differences in short chain


branching distributions and increased imperfections in the


crystallographic order and decreased lamellar thickness


with increasing short chain branch length.


Wolfe [23] studied the effect of comonomer type on the


slow crack growth resistance of high-density polyethylene


using the PENT (ASTM F1473) test. Of the two


comonomers investigated (‘B’ and ‘H’), the HDPE based


on 1-hexene failed after 4   h compared to 3  h in the case


of HDPE based on 1-butene. No comment, however, was


made on the molecular weight, distribution of the short


chain branches and orientation of molecular chains in the


pipe resins utilized.


By investigating LLDPE resins based on 1-butene and


1-octene, Kale et al. [24] compared the intrinsic tear


strengths for two sets of resins (each set had two resins


based each on 1-butene and 1-octene) of densities  .912 and


 .921 g/cm3, respectively. The resins had similar poly-


dispersities (2.12–2.25), melt flow indices ( .93–1. 2) but


different short chain branch comonomer content. For the


 .912 g/cm3 set of resins, the mol% of 1-butene was 4.17 
and that of 1-octene was 3. 4; for the  .921 g/cm3 set of


resins, these were 3. 4 and 1.77 mol%, respectively, for


1-butene and 1-octene. Despite the differences in their


comonomer content and the lack of information on the


SCBD, the higher intrinsic tear strength of the 1-octene


based LLDPE resins relative to the 1-butene based resins


was speculated to be due to enhanced tie molecule


formation with increasing short chain branch length.


Further, the observed difference in the melting point versus


mole fraction comonomer relationships for 1-butene and


1-octene based LLDPE resins was suggested to be due to the


P. Gupta et al. / Polymer 46 (2  5) 8819–8837 8821 incorporation of small amounts of 1-butene into the


crystalline phase and/or variations in the commoner


sequence distributions. However, Alizadeh et al. [25] and


Alamo et al. [26] have shown that the melting point


depression with increasing mole fraction of the short chain


branch comonomer is independent of the type of the


comonomer, i.e. at any given mole fraction of 1-butene,


1-pentene, 1-hexene and 1-octene in metallocene catalyzed


copolymers with polyethylene, the melting point depression


of all these copolymers was observed to be comparable.


Further, Alizadeh et al. [25] observed that at any given


mol% of the short chain branch comonomer, the degree of


crystallinity was also very comparable for LLDPE based on


1-butene, 1-pentene, 1-hexene and 1-octene. These obser-


vations clearly suggest that the degree/probability of branch


exclusion from the lamellar crystal is independent of the


comonomer type, viz. 1-butene, 1-hexene and 1-octene.


Therefore, in turn, one would expect no differences in tie


molecule formation for the three LLDPE materials based on


1-butene, 1-hexene and 1-octene.


Kennedy et al. [27] also studied the tensile stress–strain


behavior of metallocene catalyzed LLDPE resins based on


1-butene, 1-hexene, 1-octene and 4-methyl-1-pentene. It


was observed that the nominal-stress strain curves, that were


measured at low deformation rate of  .   4 m/s (1 in./min)


compared to high deformation rates involved during the


impact ( .2–4 m/s) and Elmendorf tear testing ( .1–7 m/s),


were dominated by strain hardening for all the LLDPEs


resins excepting those based on 1-butene. The yield stress


and initial modulus were related to the degree of crystal-


linity regardless of the short chain branch comonomer.


More importantly, for the highest molecular weights studied


(MwO1  ,    g/mol) the force-elongation curves


(recorded at low deformation rates of  .   4 m/s) for the


four resins were observed to be similar to one another for the


same short chain branch content. This last observation is


important for until the present report, the tensile stress strain


behavior of LLDPE resins, particularly based on 1-butene,


1-hexene or 1-octene, have not been systematically studied


at high deformation rates similar to those involved in dart or


Spencer impact and Elmendorf tear strength testing. In


addition, the dart or Spencer impact strength and Elmendorf


tear resistance measurements, although standard ASTM


measurements in industry are characterized by non-uniform


deformation rates.


It is important to note that most of the studies that relate


to the influence exerted by the branch length involve


comparisons of LLDPE films from resins that either have


different short chain branch contents, different comonomer


distribution profile (SCBD), different polydispersities or


different short chain branch density on the main ethylene


backbone. As a result, it is extremely difficult to properly


interpret the results and separate the effects of the individual


parameters (mentioned above) on the physical properties of


LLDPE resins due to their simultaneous variation. Thus, in


this study, three LLDPE resins based on 1-butene, 1-hexene


and 1-octene, that have been carefully synthesized [28] 
using the same single site metallocene based catalyst, were


examined to specifically investigate the effect of the


comonomer type (short chain branch length), viz.


1-butene, 1-hexene and 1-octene on the mechanical proper-


ties of blown and compression molded LLDPE films. As


will be discussed later, these three resins were very


comparable in terms of their molecular, rheological,


comonomer content and SCBD aspects. As a result, any


differences arising out of structural differences from other


origins, while not fully eliminated, were minimized. Results


from the earlier study [28] showed that while the tensile


properties, at nominal deformation rates, of the blown films


were indistinguishable, the Elmendorf tear, dart impact and


Spencer impact properties of the 1-butene based films were


significantly lower than the corresponding 1-hexene and


1-octene based films. The difference between 1-hexene and


1-octene films was much smaller with a slight advantage for


the 1-octene films. In this study, we attempt to further


investigate the effect of the type of the short chain branch on


the mechanical properties of LLDPE films since other


parameters (like comonomer content, SCBD, molecular


weight, molecular weight distribution, polydispersity and


density) were established to be essentially constant [28].


The mechanical properties were measured utilizing Spencer


impact, Elmendorf tear resistance and high-speed puncture


resistance measurements as well as in a controlled tensile


deformation regime by utilizing the essential work of


fracture methodology/technique.


2. Essential work of fracture (EWF)


Recent studies have indicated that the EWF procedure is


a very useful method to study the fracture properties of thin


films and ductile materials [29–33]. The concept of EWF


was developed initially by Cotterell and Reddel [34] on the


basis of ideas proposed by Broberg [35], who suggested that


the total work of fracture (Wf) dissipated in a precracked


specimen could be represented as a sum of the work


consumed into two distinct zones. As shown in Fig. 1, the


double-edge-notched-tension (DENT) specimen that is


precracked along the horizontal (inwards from the vertical


edges) to leave a ligament region ‘l’ that undergoes the actual


deformation in tension under a load ‘F’ along the vertical.


The regions marked as ‘1’ and ‘2’ depict the fracture process


zone (FPZ) and the outer plastic zone, respectively, (OPZ).


The work dissipated in the FPZ corresponds to the


essential work of fracture (We); and the work required to


yield the material in the OPZ is the non-essential work of


fracture (Wp) that depends on the geometry of the specimen


tested. Thus, the total fracture energy is expressed as (more


details are provided elsewhere [34]):


Wf ZWe CWp ZweltCwpbl 2t (1) 
Fig. 1. Sample geometry utilized in the double edge notched tension


(DENT) mode. The zones marked with 1 and 2 indicate the fracture process


zone (FPZ) and outer plastic zone (OPZ), respectively. The ligament length


(denoted as ‘l’) in the present study was 1, 2 or 3 mm.


Table 1 
Rheology, density, molecular weight and its distribution, and comonomer


short chain branch content in LLDPE resinsbased on ethylene/1-butene


(‘B’), ethylene/1-hexene (‘H’) and ethylene/1-octene (‘O’) [28] 
Property Resin ‘B’ Resin ‘H’ Resin ‘O’


MI (g/1  min)a 1. 9 1. 1 1. 2 
Density (g/cm3)b  .918  .918  .917 
Total mol% [X] 2.95 2.47 2.56 
h  (Pa s) 7.24E3 7.26E3 7.13E3 
Mw (kg/mol) 99.  98.1 97.9 
Mn (kg/mol) 44.2 44.2 43.2 
Mw/Mn 2.24 2.22 2.27 
a ASTM D1238. b ASTM D15 5. 
P. Gupta et al. / Polymer 46 (2  5) 8819–88378822 where we is the specific essential work of fracture (per unit


ligament area), wp is the specific non-essential work of


fracture (per unit volume), l is the ligament length, t is the


specimen thickness and b is the plastic zone shape factor.


The total specific work of fracture is represented by:


wf Z Wf


lt Zwe Cbwpl (2) 
From Eq. (2), it is clear that wf has a linear relationship with


the ligament length. In other words, a plot of the wf as a


function of l should be linear with the intercept on the


ordinate axis and the slope providing we and bwp,


respectively. Thus, this method involves testing of speci-


mens that have different ligament lengths, and then


evaluating the Wf for each specimen (area under the


force–displacement curve) followed by suitable normal-


ization with respect to the ligament area to give a plot of wf


vs. l. The best-fit regression line would then give the slope


(bwp) and intercept (we).


When plane stress conditions prevail for all ligament


lengths, it is assumed [36] that we is a material property (a


constant) at a given thickness. Mathematically, for plane


stress conditions, the following two relationships should be


satisfied:


lR ð3w5Þt (3) 
t/25 we


sy (4) 
Under these conditions, it has been demonstrated theoreti-


cally [37] and supported experimentally [37–39] that we is


equivalent to Jc, or the J-integral. For a nonlinear elastic


body containing a precrack and undergoing deformation, Jc represents the strain energy release rate of nonlinear elastic


materials and is given by: [4 ] 
JC ZK dU


dA (5) 
where U is the potential energy (also the difference between


the strain energy stored in the body and the work done by


external forces of deformation) and A is the crack area. It


can be seen that the units of Jc are also energy/area (the


same as we). Thus, the advantage of the EWF method is its


experimental simplicity as compared to the J-integral


procedure.


3. Experimental


3.1. Material synthesis


The three LLDPE copolymers (based on ethylene-co-1- 
butene, ‘B’, ethylene-co-1-hexene, ‘H’, and ethylene-co-1- 
octene, ‘O’) used in this study were synthesized by using a


Chevron Phillips’ proprietary zirconium based metallocene


catalyst [28]. The copolymerization was conducted in a pilot


plant at Chevron Phillips under steady state slurry-loop


copolymerization conditions. The comonomers and the


catalyst were fed continuously and the polymer fluff was


continuously removed from the reactor. The fluff was


purged with nitrogen to remove residual solvent and


unreacted olefins followed by blending with antioxidants


and a processing aid. The polymers were then extruded into


pellets.


3.2. Characterization of the resins


The molecular, rheological and branching characteristics


of the three resins are listed in Table 1. The rheological data


were obtained using a Rheometrics Scientific Inc., ARES


rheometer. Small strain (1 %) oscillatory measurements


across a frequency range of  . 3–95 rad/s were made at


19  8C under a nitrogen blanket. The resulting complex


viscosity versus frequency data was fitted using the modi-


fied Carreau–Yasuda (CY) empirical model [41,42] to


obtain the zero shear viscosity (h ). The molecular weight,


P. Gupta et al. / Polymer 46 (2  5) 8819–8837 8823 and the molecular weight distribution were determined by


gel permeation chromatography (GPC). Nuclear magnetic


resonance (NMR) was utilized to determine the amount of


comonomer and thus the short chain branching incorporated


into the respective copolymers. The experimental proce-


dures of these two techniques are outlined in detail else-


where [43]. In addition, the comonomer composition


distribution across the molecular weight distribution of


these three copolymers was determined by a recently deve-


loped chemometric technique [44] based on size exclusion


chromatography and Fourier transform infrared spectros-


copy (SEC–FTIR).


Temperature rising elution fractionation (TREF) was


performed on the three resins to determine the homogeneity


of incorporation of SCB in the copolymers. This was done


by using a triple detector TREF instrument which was


assembled using parts retro-fitted into a Waters 15 C GPC


system. The column (12.55 mm ID and 15  mm in length)


was packed with #3  stainless steel shot (Vulcan Blast Shot


Technology, Brantfor, Ont., Canada). The oven heater pro-


vided programmed cooling and heating in the 35–15  8C 
range. It was controlled externally via West 44   set point


programmer. Three detectors, viz. a Foxboro infrared (IR)


(3.4 nm), a Viscotek 15 R viscometer and a PDI 15 and


9 -degree dual-angle light scattering detector, were utilized


for characterization. The viscometer and the light scattering


detector were housed in the same oven while the IR cell was


heated separately. Sample solutions were prepared in the


carrier solvent, 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene (TCB), at 3 mg/mL.


In the experiment, 5   mL of the sample solution was


injected onto the column at 15  8C and subsequently cooled


to 35 8C at a rate of  .72 8C/min, to allow slow and complete


crystallization. The column was then slowly re-heated to


15  8C at a rate of 1.5 8C/min with a solvent flow rate


of  .5 mL/min, during which the polymer molecules


re-dissolved and eluted out into the three detectors. Analysis


of the data obtained from the IR detector was done to get


normalized weight fraction of the fractionated copolymer as


a function of the temperature.


3.3. Film preparation


Blown films were made from each of the three resins


under the following conditions: 1   mm (4 in.) die diameter,


1.5 mm die gap, 37.5 mm diameter single-screw extruder


(L/DZ24, compression ratio 2.2:1), 115 rpm screw speed (ca.


27 kg/h output rate), 2.5:1 blow up ratio (BUR) and barrel and


die temperatures set to 19  8C. The freeze line height (FLH)


was between 2  and 28 cm and cooling was accomplished


with a dual lip air ring using ambient air that had a temperature


of ca. 2  8C. Films with different thicknesses (12.5–1   mm or  .5–4 mil) were produced this way. These conditions are


representative of typical commercial scale LLDPE blown


film processing according to scaling procedures established


previously [45].


In addition to these blown films, unoriented quenched


and slow cooled compression molded films were also pro-


duced. Preweighed amounts of the copolymer pellets were


melted in a mold at 15  8C for 1  min followed by the


application of 3    lb f (ca. 135  kg f) for 5 min. Quenched


(Q) samples were prepared by being removed from the


heater plates followed by being placed on a wooden labora-


tory bench and exposed to ambient conditions. The samples


took ca. 5 min to cool to ambient temperature (ca. 2  8C).


For the slow cooled (SC) samples, the mold containing the


molten film was allowed to remain between the heater plates


after the pressure was released. The power to the heater


plates was then turned off to allow slow cooling of the films.


The samples attained room temperature in ca. 8 h. Both the


Q and SC films were ca. 125 mm (5 mil) in thickness.


3.4. Film characterization


The blown films of different thicknesses were tested for


their dart impact strength, Spencer impact strength and


Elmendorf tear resistance according to ASTM D-17 9 
(method A), ASTM D-342  (although a special in-house


pendulum was utilized to ensure failures) and ASTM


D-1922 standards, respectively, at ambient conditions. In


addition, high-speed puncture resistance of the LLDPE


copolymers, at a high impact velocity (5.1 m/s), was also


investigated. For this test, quenched compression molded


and slow cooled plaques of approximately 3.35 mm


thickness were employed. The compression molded speci-


mens (corresponding to ‘B’, ‘H’ and ‘O’) were clamped in a


circular fixture that is 76 mm in diameter. A 23.76 kg mass


tup/dart (13 mm diameter hemispherical end) was dropped


on the clamped specimens at an impact velocity of 5.1 m/s


(corresponding to a drop height of 1 m). The direction of


impact was parallel to the specimen thickness, and the point


of impact was at the center of the clamped specimen. The


tup/dart was equipped with a load sensor to measure the load


response as a function of time, during the impact event. A


separate photo sensor provided a measurement of the initial


impact velocity. At a given weight of the tup/dart assembly


and its impact velocity, the specimen load-deflection data


for the impact event was recorded. Total energy (J) to


rupture as measured from the load-deflection curve was


used to characterize the impact performance. The quantities


(energy to rupture) measured from this test are not fixed


material properties as they depend on the test specimen size


(thickness) and the specific test conditions.


Blown films that were 25 mm in thickness (each from


resins based on 1-butene, 1-hexene and 1-octene) in


addition to the compression molded films were chosen for


the rest of the characterization methods utilized including


refractive index measurements, differential scanning calori-


metry (DSC) and essential work of fracture analysis. Flat


plate wide angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) patterns of the


blown films were obtained at ambient conditions using a


Philips PW172  X-ray generator. Four layers of each of


the 25 mm (1 mil) thick blown film (based on 1-butene,


P. Gupta et al. / Polymer 46 (2  5) 8819–88378824 1-hexene and 1-octene) were carefully aligned and stacked


on the sample holder to obtain sufficient scattering intensity


for exposure of the WAXS pattern at 4  kV, 2  mA and 4 h.


The sample to imaging plate distance was 5 cm. The X-ray


beam was parallel to the normal of the sample plane.


Pin-hole collimated small-angle X-ray scattering


(SAXS) profiles of compression molded films were


collected at ambient temperature using a Rigaku Ultrax18 
rotating anode X-ray generator operated at 4  kV and


6  mA. A pyrolytic graphite monochromator was used to


filter out all radiation except the Cu Ka doublet, with an


average wavelength of 1.5418 Å. The camera used 2  , 1   
and 3   nm pinholes for X-ray collimation. Two-dimen-


sional data sets were collected using a molecular metrology


2D multi-wire area detector, located ca. 65 cm from the


sample. After azimuthal averaging, the raw data was


corrected for detector noise, absorption, and background


noise. The data were then placed on an absolute scale using


a type 2 glassy carbon sample 1. 7 mm thickness,


previously calibrated at the advanced photon source at the


Argonne National Laboratory, as a secondary standard. All


the SAXS profiles presented have been masked in the low


scattering vector region where the beam stop influenced the


profiles.


Refractive index measurements were conducted at


ambient conditions on all the compression molded films


and the 25 mm (1 mil) thick blown films using a Metricon


Prism coupler Model 2 1  along the three coordinates.


Measurements in the normal (ND), machine (MD) and


transverse direction (TD) were recorded. An average of 3–5 
measurements was reported in each direction. Thermal


behavior was investigated on a Seiko SSC/52   DSC. The


heating and cooling traces were recorded at 2  8C/min in a


nitrogen-purged atmosphere to study the melting and


crystallization of these samples. Small angle light scattering


(SALS) patterns in the Hn configuration were recorded at


ambient conditions by utilizing a He–Ne laser at 633 nm.


The sample to imaging plate distance was 11 cm.


Crystalline, amorphous and interfacial contents in


compression molded films were estimated by analyzing


the free induction decay (FID) data obtained from NMR


(method described below), although Alamo et al. [26] and


Mandelkern et al. [46,47] have utilized a different method


involving analysis of Raman spectra on LLDPEs based on


1-butene, 1-hexene and 1-octene. In the present study, all


NMR measurements on compression molded films were


made using an Auburn IMR analyzer operating at 2  MHz.


Morphological analysis was accomplished by fitting the free


induction decay (FID) to a three-component model, viz.


crystalline, amorphous and interfacial. The data was


obtained using a 9 8 pulse (2 ms), 1 s pulse delay (which


was much greater than five times T1) and a 17 ms dead time


to eliminate signal contamination from the probe ring down.


Each FID consisted of 3   points, where each data point


was sampled every 1 ms, with 16  transients acquired to


improve signal-to-noise. The model utilized to fit the data


was based on the procedure suggested by Kristiansen [48].


The signal intensity versus time for hydrogen nuclei located


in the crystalline domain is represented by [49,5 ]:


PðtÞZ


ffiffiffiffi p


6


r exp K


1


2 b2t2 
  cos atffiffiffiffi


at p C


ffiffiffiffiffiffiffi 6at


p


r" #(


C sin atffiffiffiffi


at p S


ffiffiffiffiffiffiffi 6at


p


r" #) (6) 
where a is related to the hydrogen–hydrogen distance and b


is related to the width of Gaussian broadening. Since, a and


b are associated with the crystalline domain, and more


specifically a function of the hydrogen–hydrogen distance,


these two parameters are expected to be constant. Therefore,


a series of ten resins with densities from  .918 to  .96  were


analyzed. The values found for a and b did not vary much


and average values obtained were: aZ1. 7 eC 5, bZ 72,94 . These were used in all the fits reported in this study.


The two functions C[x] and S[x] are also referred as Fresnell


functions.


The best fit of the signal intensity–time relationship for


the hydrogen nuclei located in the non-crystalline domains,


viz. interfacial and amorphous, can be expressed as the


Weilbullian function:


IðtÞZA exp K ðtÞd


T2


  (7) 
where two separate sets of values of the pre-exponential


factor, A, spin–spin relaxation time, T2, and the Weilbullian


factor, d, were utilized for amorphous and interfacial


domains, respectively. The three equations were then solved


simultaneously by putting the FID data into an Excel


spreadsheet and using Microsoft Solver to find the best least


squared fit between the experimental data and the model.


Tensile stress–strain curves were recorded at 1 m/s on a


specialized MTS system 81 . The servohydraulic actuator


was operated in displacement control. The force transducer


(Kistler 9712B5 ) was mounted directly to the crosshead.


The force signal was amplified with a Kistler 5 1 B and


acquired with a Nicolet Integra oscilloscope at data


acquisition rates of 1 –4  kHz, depending on specimen


type. The specimen geometry utilized for tensile tests was


rectangular, 75!17 mm2. The distance between the jaws of


the tensile tester was 1  mm. For the DENT mode,


specimens of 25.4!25.4 mm2 (1!1 in.2) with ligament


lengths of 1, 2 and 3 mmwere tested at 1 m/s. It is noted that


for blown films, the specimens deformed in the MD


direction are representative of the measurement in the TD


as the crack propagates in the TD. Likewise, the samples


deformed in the TD are representative of the measurements


in the MD. Thus, the EWF results for blown films are


reported corresponding to the direction of the propagation of


the crack. For a thorough regressional analysis, at least five


specimens were tested at each ligament length. Prior to


P. Gupta et al. / Polymer 46 (2  5) 8819–8837 8825 testing, the specimens were weighed to compute the average


thickness of the film in the ligament region. Individual


force–displacement curves were integrated by a computer


program to calculate the total fracture energy. This was then


normalized by the area of the ligament to provide the


specific fracture energy (wf) and then plotted against the


ligament length (l). Regression analysis of this data was


performed to obtain the values of the intercept which equals


the essential work of fracture, we.


4. Results and discussion


As can be seen in Table 1, the three copolymers (‘B’, ‘H’


and ‘O’) are essentially identical in their basic molecular


and rheological characteristics. These three resins have a


very similar melt flow index (1. 1–1. 9 g/1  min) and


density ( .917– .918 g/cm3). The number average (Mn) and


weight average molecular weight (Mw) obtained from the


GPC are nearly identical (43.2–44.2 and 97.9–99 kg/mol,


respectively). The GPC curves for each of the three resins,


as shown in Fig. 2 are also comparable. This behavior is


further supported by very similar zero shear rate viscosity


values (7.13–7.26 kPa s). The polydispersity (2.22–2.27),


that reflects the breadth of the molecular weight distribution,


and the total comonomer content (2.47–2.95 mol%), as


obtained by NMR, is also very similar for each of these three


resins. The NMR data also indicate the presence of small


levels of ethyl branches in the ‘H’ and ‘O’ resin ( .12 and


 .15 mol%, respectively). This is due to the generation of a


small level of ‘in situ’ ethyl branches that are indistinguish-


able from the ethyl branches introduced by 1-butene in the


copolymerization of ‘B’ copolymer. For the ‘H’ and ‘O’


resins, these ethyl branches were detected by NMR in


addition to the butyl and hexyl branches, respectively. Thus, Fig. 2. Molecular weight distribution and the number of short chain


branches (corresponding to each resin) per 1    carbon atoms of the


backbone of the three LLDPE resins (indicated on the secondary ordinate


axis). the total mol% reported in Table 1 reflects the total amount


of short chain branches (including the very small amount of


ethyl branches in addition to the butyl or hexyl branches,


respectively, for the ‘H’ and ‘O’ resins). Nevertheless, the


total comononer content ([X] mol%) required to make a


 .918 g/cm3 density is somewhat higher for the 1-butene


copolymer than those based on 1-hexene and 1-octene. The


short chain branching distribution data is plotted in Fig. 2 
(secondary ordinate axis). The number of short chain


branches/1    C atoms in each of three resins is essentially


uniform (9–11/1    C) across the width of the molecular


weight distribution. Despite some scatter at the low and


high-end of the molecular weight distribution that is


attributed to higher error in the measurements [44], the


three copolymer resins indicate a similar SCBD. Another


parameter that indicates the uniformity of the distribution of


short chain branches across the MWD is the % relative


monomer dispersity (%RMD) index, as determined by


solution NMR [51,52]. RMD is the tendency of the


comonomer units to be either ‘isolated’ (%RMDZ1  ) or


‘clustered’ (%RMD!1  ). The values of the three resins


utilized in this study are essentially the same, viz. 99.1, 99.7 
and 99.3% for ‘B’, ‘H’ and ‘O’, respectively.


The information from the chemometric technique to


determine the SCBD (as reported in Fig. 2) does not indicate


the distribution of the short chain branches along a given


polymer chain. To ascertain any difference in this


distribution for the three copolymers, TREF was performed


on each of the LLDPE resins. These results are provided in


Fig. 3. All three resins (‘B’, ‘H’ and ‘O’) possess the general


comonomer distribution profile characteristic of the resins


produced by single site metallocene catalysts [53,54]. In the


Ziegler–Natta catalyzed LLDPE resins, a low temperature


peak (between 45 and 55 8C) that is due to the elution of a


soluble fraction heavily concentrated with comonomers and


Fig. 3. TREF profiles of the three LLDPE resins based on 1-butene, 1- 
hexene and 1-octene.


P. Gupta et al. / Polymer 46 (2  5) 8819–88378826 a broad peak in the 55–8  8C range that is due to the elution


of ‘branched’ fraction made up of polymer molecules of


various comonomer contents are also observed [55].


However, the absence of the low temperature peaks (in


the range of 45–8  8C) in the TREF profiles of metallocene


catalyzed LLDPE resins utilized in this study indicate a


homogenous incorporation of the short chain comonomer in


the linear ethylene backbone as compared to resins


synthesized by Ziegler–Natta catalysts. A closer inspection


of the three profiles in Fig. 3 indicates some differences that


are most likely attributable to some level of difference in the


SCB distribution (along a given polymer chain) among the


three copolymers utilized in this study. These differences


show that resin ‘B’ has the most homogeneous crystal-


lizability/solubility behavior in comparison to ‘H’ and ‘O’.


These differences were primarily manifested in the ‘second


heating’ DSC results on blown and compression molded


films (results discussed in detail later, Figs. 8(b) and 9(b)),


where the presence of a low temperature shoulder on the


melting endotherms of ‘H’ and ‘O’ in comparison to ‘B’ was


observed. This difference in the second melting DSC


behavior of ‘H’ and ‘O’ in comparison to ‘B’ could arise


from the slightly more homogenous distribution of SCB


(along the ethylene backbone) in ‘B’ than ‘H’ and ‘O’, as


indicated by TREF profiles. However, the SCBD data in


Fig. 2 and the near 1  % RMD values of the three resins


indicate that the overall or average SCB distribution across


the MWD is in fact very similar for all three copolymers.


Hence, we believe that the magnitude of any differences that


may be observed in physical properties (discussed later)


cannot simply be attributed to this difference in the TREF


profiles.


The refractive index data on compression molded and


25 mm (1 mil) thick blown films is listed in Table 2. As can


be observed, within a given series (be it quenched, slow


cooled or blown) the average refractive index for the three


resins is essentially the same. As expected, the average


refractive indices of the slow cooled films are somewhat


higher than the corresponding quenched and blown films.


For the blown films, the refractive index was observed to be


slightly higher in the MD than that in TD, as might also be


expected. The difference in the refractive indices in the MD Table 2 
Percentage crystallinity of LLDPE compression molded and blown films as calcu


Material n(ND) n(TD) n(MD) n


B–Q 1.5142 1.5148 1.515  1 
H–Q 1.5141 1.5141 1.5143 1 
O–Q 1.5135 1.5147 1.5152 1 
B–SC 1.5156 1.5167 1.5165 1 
H–SC 1.5147 1.5168 1.5165 1 
O–SC 1.5136 1.5161 1.5159 1 
B-blown 1.5127 1.5132 1.514  1 
H-blown 1.5129 1.5128 1.514  1 
O-blown 1.5122 1.5129 1.5137 1 
Note the birefringence (Dn) of the blown films as computed by the difference in and TD directions, respectively, nMDKnTD, gives the in-


plane birefringence, Dn. These are listed as well in the


extreme right in Table 2. The small values of Dn do not


indicate a high level of orientation along the MD (in


comparison to that in TD) in these films. The out-of-plane


birefringence, nMDKnND, is  .  13,  .  11 and  .  15 for


‘B’, ‘H’ and ‘O’ blown films, respectively. These values are


comparable to the in-plane birefringence, thereby indicating


a slight uniaxial orientation for these blown films. The


WAXS patterns taken with the beam parallel to the sample


film normal are shown in Fig. 4. The intensities of the


(1 1  ) and (2    ) reflections show some azimuthal


dependence, as expected. In particular, the (2  ) reflections


are slightly lower in intensity at the equator than that at the


meridian, thereby indicating a low a-axis orientation along


the MD. This is a common observation for polyethylene


blown films produced at low stress levels. As expected, the


(11 ) plane reflections, on the other hand, have a relatively


lower meridianal intensity than that observed equatorially.


Returning to the refractive index data in Table 2, the


density of the films from the average refractive index was


calculated by the following relationship [56]:


rZ 1


r


  n2 K1 
n2 C2 
  (8) 
where rZ .3278. From the density of the samples, the %


crystallinity (volume) was computed by the following


relationship:


%Xc Z rKra


rc Kra


  !1   (9) 
where r is the sample density, ra is the density of 1  % 
amorphous polyethylene and rc is the density of 1  % 
crystalline PE. The values of ra and rc were taken as  .85 
and 1 g/cm3 [57], respectively. The density and %Xc for all


the LLDPE films are listed in Table 2. For the samples in a


given series (be it quenched, slow cooled or blown), the


films (based on ‘B’, ‘H’ and ‘O’) had essentially the same


density and consequently %Xc within limits of experimental


error. This is in agreement with the results reported by


Alizadeh et al. [25] (as pointed out earlier), who observed a


very comparable degree of crystallinity for compression


lated by refractive index measurements


r (g/cm3) % Xc (vol.) Dn (nMDKnTD)


.5145  .9192 44.3G .4 –


.5141  .9186 43.9G .1 –


.5141  .9186 43.9G .9 –


.5162  .9216 46. G .6 –


.5158  .921  45.6G1.2 –


.5149  .9197 44.6G1.4 –


.513   .9169 42.7G .7  .   8 
.5129  .9167 42.5G .7  .  12 
.5126  .9162 42.2G .8  .   9 
the refractive indices in the MD and TD directions.


Fig. 4. Flat plate WAXS patterns of the 25 mm thick blown films.


Fig. 5. Small angle X-ray scattering on compression molded films.


P. Gupta et al. / Polymer 46 (2  5) 8819–8837 8827 molded quenched LLDPE films based on 1-butene,


1-pentene, 1-hexene and 1-octene at a given mol% of the


short chain branch comonomer. Their work did not support


the notion that any of the short chain branches are included


in the crystalline lattice. In the present study, the density and


consequently the %Xc of the blown and quenched films are


lower than the slow cooled samples, as expected.


The lamellar scale lengths in the quenched and slow


cooled compression molded films are indicated by SAXS


results in Fig. 5. As can be seen, within a given series, the


scattering patterns are essentially identical for ‘B’, ‘H’ and


‘O’. It is clear that the differences in TREF profiles in Fig. 3 
do not affect the SAXS behavior on the lamellar scale for


both the series investigated (compression molded quenched


and slow cooled). As expected, the long period is larger in


slow cooled films (223 Å) than that in quenched films


(2 5 Å). In addition, the results from the free induction


decay NMR experiments, that gives information on the


P. Gupta et al. / Polymer 46 (2  5) 8819–88378828 relative contents of ‘rigid’ (crystalline), ‘intermediate’


(interfacial) and ‘mobile or liquid-like’ (amorphous) phases


indicated that the content of these phases was very similar


for ‘B’, ‘H’ and ‘O’ within a given series in the compression


molded samples (Fig. 6). For the compression molded


quenched samples, the weight fractions of crystalline,


interfacial and amorphous domains are ca. 59.5, 29.8 and


11.3%, respectively, in ‘B’, ‘H’ and ‘O’ films, while the


respective values for the compression molded slow cooled


are 63.1, 24.5 and 12.7%. The calculated crystalline content


in the slow cooled films is larger than for the quenched


films, as expected. However, the interfacial content in the


slow cooled films is slightly less than that in the quenched


films, although the amorphous content is very similar in


both the compression molded series. In general, the values


of crystallinity obtained from free induction decay NMR


tends to be higher than those obtained from DSC. This is due


to the fact that taut tie molecules can also contribute to the


‘rigid’ phase. Very recently, Yoon et al. [58] utilized SAXS


and solid-state NMR method (rotor-encoded rotational echo


double resonance technique) to investigate the structure of


metallocene catalyzed LLDPEs as a function of comonomer


type (1-butene, 1-hexene and 1-octene) and content. They


also did not observe any structural differences in their series


of ‘B’, ‘H’ and ‘O’ materials investigated that had a ca.


3 mol% comonomer content.


Returning to the present study, larger scale lengths at the


micro level for our materials were characterized by SALS.


The spherulitic scale lengths in the compression molded


quenched and slow cooled films are indicated by the Hn


SALS in Fig. 7. As can be seen, the SALS patterns (within a


given series, be it quenched or slow cooled), are similar for


the ‘B’, ‘H’ and ‘O’. These ‘four-lobed’ patterns are


characteristic of a spherulitic morphology. However, when


comparing the patterns of the slow cooled with that of the


quenched films, it appears that the slow cooled films have Fig. 6. Crystalline, interfacial and amorphous contents in compression


molded films as determined by free induction decay NMR. larger but less well-defined spherulitic structures than the


quenched films. This was also supported by the surface


analysis of these films by scanning electron microscopy


(SEM) (results not shown here). The SALS patterns in the


Hn configuration can be utilized to calculate the average size


of the spherulites by use of the following relationship


[59–61]:


4pR


lm sin


qmax


2


  Z 4:13 (1 ) 
where R, is the radius of the spherulites, lm is the


wavelength in the scattering medium and qmax is the angle


of intensity maxima in one of the lobes of the Hn pattern.


The calculated diameter for the quenched films was in the


range of 2.9–3.6 mm (B–Q: 3.3 mm, H–Q: 2.9 mm and O–Q:


3.6 mm) whereas the slow cooled films were in the range of


3.8–4.2 mm (B–SC: 3.8 mm, H–SC: 4.2 mm and O–SC:


4.2 mm). As expected, the size of the spherulites in the slow


cooled films is larger than that in quenched films.


Furthermore, the SEM analysis on these films indicated a


broad distribution of sizes (data not shown).


The first and second DSC heating–cooling profiles of the


blown films are shown in Fig. 7(a) and (b), respectively. The


first heating (Fig. 8(a)) is extremely comparable for each of


the three, ‘B’, ‘H’ and ‘O’ blown films, with melting


transition peaks in the range of 117–119 8C. The first


cooling curves indicate a lower temperature primary


crystallization exotherm peak for ‘B’ (93 8C) than the ‘H’


(95.5 8C), which in turn is slightly lower than ‘O’ (96.5 8C).


It might be postulated that a lower primary crystallization


temperature peak (higher effective degree of undercooling)


indicates crystallization of relatively smaller-sized crystals


as compared to the sample that crystallized at a higher


temperature. The slightly smaller-sized lamellar crystals


should therefore begin to melt at a lower temperature. This


is confirmed by the endotherm peak positions in the second


heating cycles, where ‘B’ shows the peak endotherm at


116.5 8C whereas ‘H’ and ‘O’ show the second melting


endotherm peaks at 117.5 8C. The second heating profiles


are shown in Fig. 8(b). A distinct ‘shoulder’ in the second


cycle melting endotherm at 1 9–113 8C for the ‘H’ and ‘O’


films (Fig. 8(b)) can be clearly seen in comparison to the ‘B’


film, which does not show a distinct shoulder. This


difference in the second melting DSC behavior of ‘H’ and


‘O’ in comparison to ‘B’ could arise from the more


interchain homogeneity of SCB in ‘B’ than ‘H’ and ‘O’, as


indicated by TREF profiles in Fig. 3. Another noticeable and


identical feature in the first and second cooling curves is the


presence of a small exotherm transition at 63 8C for each of


the three films within a given series, be it blown, quenched


or slow cooled. This secondary crystallization is postulated


to lead to the formation of a second population of lamellar


crystals that are thinner than those formed during the


primary crystallization process at higher temperatures.


The DSC results of the compression molded films are


Fig. 7. Small angle light scattering results in the Hn configuration on compression molded films.


P. Gupta et al. / Polymer 46 (2  5) 8819–8837 8829 shown in Fig. 9, where only the heating curves are shown.


Based on the first heating curves (Fig. 9(a)), the melting


peaks of the quenched and slow cooled films are in the range


of 115–117 8C. Only the slow cooled films of ‘H’ and ‘O’


show a slightly broader melting endotherm than that of ‘B’.


These samples were left in the insulated DSC chamber and


allowed to cool down to room temperature in about 2 h after


which they were heated again and the corresponding second


heating curves were recorded (Fig. 9(b)). As can be seen, a


behavior similar to what was observed for the blown films is


noted. Specifically, the presence of a ‘shoulder’ on the


melting endotherms of ‘H’ and ‘O’ (for both quenched and


slow cooled) is much more distinct and marked as these


samples were cooled very slowly after the first melting (as


against a cooling rate of 2  8C/min for the blown films). As


stated earlier, the slightly broader first melting endotherms


of ‘H’ and ‘O’ than ‘B’ and the difference in the second


melting DSC behavior of ‘H’ and ‘O’ in comparison to ‘B’


could arise from the slightly more homogenous distribution


of SCB (along the ethylene backbone) in ‘B’ than ‘H’ and


‘O’, as indicated by TREF profiles in Fig. 3. Nevertheless, it


can be said that the thermal behavior based on the first


heating responses of these films ‘B’, ‘H’ and ‘O’ (be it


quenched or blown) are very similar. In the compression


molded slow cooled films, whether the slightly broader first


melting endotherms of ‘H’ and ‘O’ play a role in governing


the mechanical properties at slow deformation rates of these


films will become clear in the following discussion.


The tensile properties of the 25 mm thick blown films and


compression molded films that were measured at slow draw


rates, ca.  .   4– .  8 m/s, (25–51  mm/min) are shown in


Fig. 1 . The yield and breaking strength are essentially the


same for the films based on ‘B’, ‘H’ and ‘O’ in each


direction (MD or TD). For the LLDPE blown films, due to


preferential orientation of the lamellar crystals, the TD


modulus tends to be higher than the MD modulus [13].


However, for the films investigated here, the low levels of


orientation translates to the modulus being only marginally


higher along the TD. Likewise, the tensile properties of the


compression molded films (Fig. 1 (b)) at conventional draw


rates indicate very comparable yield and breaking strengths


for films based on ‘B’, ‘H’ and ‘O’, within a given series.


Within the limits of error, the tensile modulus is also very


similar for films based on three resins in each series. These


results clearly indicate that the slight differences in the


TREF profiles in Fig. 3 and differences in first melting DSC


profiles of compression molded slow cooled films really do


not play any role in governing the mechanical properties


when obtained at slow deformation rates (up to  .  8 m/s).


To ascertain any differences in the tensile properties at


Fig. 8. DSC melting and cooling curves of blown LLDPE films. The (a) first


and (b) second heating–cooling cycles measured at 2  8C/min are shown.


Fig. 9. DSC melting endotherms of compression molded LLDPE films. The


(a) first and (b) second heating curves measured at 2  8C/min are shown.


P. Gupta et al. / Polymer 46 (2  5) 8819–8837883  higher deformation rates, the stress strain behavior was


measured at a higher deformation rate of 1 m/s (about two


orders of magnitude higher than before). These results are


shown in Fig. 11(a) and (b) for 25 mm thick blown and


compression molded films. Due to the extremely high rate of


data acquisition, the ‘ringing’ characteristics of the load


path’s mechanical elements (primarily the load cell/grip


assembly) appear as oscillations in the ‘yield’ region of the


curves. However, the yield strength values of both the blown


and compression molded films are readily distinguished,


and all fall in the range of 17–2  MPa. The ‘H’ and ‘O’


blown films also show a higher breaking strain than that for


corresponding ‘B’ films (Fig. 11(a)). Likewise, B–Q and


B–SC underwent failure before yielding or plastic drawing


could take place whereas, with the exception of the ‘O–SC’,


the compression molded ‘H’ and ‘O’ materials yield, draw


and undergo significant post ‘natural draw ratio’ defor-


mation before failure (Fig. 11(b)). A noticeable trend was


observed in the breaking strengths. The breaking strength of


the 1-butene based films (‘B’) is distinctly lower than that


for the 1-hexene (‘H’) and 1-octene (‘O’) based films,


regardless of film type (quenched, slow cooled or blown).


For the blown films, the ‘B’ films have a breaking strength


of ca. 21–24 MPa as compared to that of 31–36 MPa for ‘H’


and ‘O’ films. In either direction (MD or TD) the ‘H’ and


‘O’ films also show distinctly greater strain hardening when


compared to the ‘B’ films, and this accounts for the higher


values of the breaking strengths. Similarly, strain hardening


can be observed in the ‘H’ and ‘O’ compression molded


films. The quenched and slow cooled films of ‘B’ do not


undergo any strain hardening and display much lower


breaking strengths (6–1  MPa) as compared to the high


values of the ‘H’ and ‘O’ films (16–26 MPa). Note that


when the breaking strengths of the compression molded and


blown films corresponding to the same resin are compared,


the blown films have superior properties. Comparing the


results in Figs. 9 and 1 , it can be inferred that the breaking


strength of blown films of ‘B’ is lower than that of ‘H’ and


‘O’, an effect that is evident only at high deformation rates.


Further tests conducted on the blown films to measure


Fig. 1 . Tensile properties of (a) 25 mm thick blown films and (b)


compression molded films at  .   4– .  8 m/s (25–51  mm/min).


Fig. 11. Engineering stress–strain curves of (a) blown and (b) compression


molded films at 1 m/s.


Fig. 12. Dart impact strength of blown films at  .1–1 m/s.


P. Gupta et al. / Polymer 46 (2  5) 8819–8837 8831 their dart impact strength, Spencer impact strength and


Elmendorf tear properties, where high deformation rates of


 .1–1,  .1–7 and  .2–4 m/s, respectively, were utilized, also


confirm this behavior. As shown in Fig. 12, the dart impact


strength, at any given film gage, of ‘B’ is significantly lower


than that of ‘H’ and ‘O’. During the dart impact testing,


some of the films, especially at higher gage, did not rupture


at the maximum allowable force corresponding to the


falling dart of 14   g. Hence, those values are reported as


‘O14   g’ in Fig. 12. Turning to the results in Fig. 13(a)


and (b), it is clearly noted that Elmendorf tear and Spencer


impact strength increase with increasing short chain branch


length at any given blown film thickness. Furthermore,


within samples of the same copolymer type (‘B’, ‘H’ or ‘O’)


these properties increase with increasing blown film


thickness, as would be expected. Of particular importance


is that for any given direction (MD or TD), the Elmendorf


tear strength and Spencer impact strength increase in the


order: ‘O’O‘H’O‘B’. The results of the puncture resistance


measurements on compression molded quenched and slow


cooled plaques are given in Fig. 14, which again support that


the materials based on 1-butene are inferior to those based


on 1-hexene and 1-octene. The load-deformation curves are


plotted in Fig. 14(a) for the representative samples


corresponding to ‘B’, ‘H’ and ‘O’, respectively, in each


series (quenched and slow cooled). Five specimens


Fig. 13. (a) Elmendorf tear strength at  .1–7 m/s and (b) Spencer impact


strength at  .2–4 m/s of blown films as a function of the film thickness.


Fig. 14. (a) Sample load–deformation curves corresponding to ‘B’, ‘H’ and


‘O’; (b) high speed puncture resistance and deformation at break of ‘B’, ‘H’


and ‘O’ materials measured in terms of total rupture energy.


P. Gupta et al. / Polymer 46 (2  5) 8819–88378832 corresponding each to ‘B’, ‘H’ and ‘O’ in each series


(quenched and slow cooled) were tested (load-deformation


curves of representative specimens shown Fig. 14(a)). The


results indicated a good reproducibility for each material


type. The average integrated energy to rupture and the


deformation to failure are plotted in Fig. 14(b). As can be


seen, within a given series, be it quenched and slow cooled,


the total deformation to failure (plotted on the secondary


axis of Fig. 14(b)), of ‘H’ and ‘O’ is higher than that of ‘B’,


indicating an increased ductile failure in ‘H’ and ‘O’. This


was also confirmed visually by the fact that the deformed


‘H’ and ‘O’ samples had a longer and ductile sleeve


(relative to that in ‘B’) that emanated from the region where


the mechanically driven tup exited the sample. This is also


reflected as higher total rupture energies for ‘H’ and ‘O’


(55–61 J) than ‘B’ (3 –37 J). However, in all these tests,


viz. dart impact, Spencer impact and Elmendorf Tear the


rate of deformation of the films is not well-defined. In a dart


impact measurement, a falling dart ruptures the film held in


tension and the equivalent force to rupture is recorded in


terms of the mass of the falling dart. In the case of the


Spencer impact strength measurements, a piece of film is


held in tension and punctured with a hemispherical head


attached to a swinging pendulum whereas in Elmendorf tear


resistance, the precut film sample is ruptured by a swinging


pendulum. In the puncture resistance measurements the


sample is held in tension and punctured by a pneumatically


driven tup/dart. In either configuration, the deformation rate


of the film can be visualized to be a maximum at the


initiation (when the pendulum or the ball/dart hits the film)


and then decreases thereafter as the crack progresses (as


most of the energy carried by the pendulum or the ball/dart


has already been spent in overcoming the initial resistance).


Thus, the rates of deformation (reported above) are at best


estimates and never an exact value, as the deformation


process of the samples is not well-controlled.


To characterize the deformation of the films in a more


well-defined extensional regime, tear resistance properties


were measured by utilizing the essential work of fracture


(recall earlier discussion of this methodology). Here, precut


films that have a specified ligament length were deformed


in a tensile manner at 1 m/s to investigate their tear


resistance properties. A typical stress–displacement behav-


ior for the blown film based on resin ‘H’ is shown for two


ligament lengths, viz. 1 and 3 mm in Fig. 15(a) and (b).


Fig. 15. Sample engineering stress–displacement curves in the double edge


notched tensile test (DENT) mode of ethylene/1-hexene blown film in the


TD for ligament lengths of (a) 1 mm and (b) 3 mm. Data for four samples


(corresponding to each ligament length and marked as i, ii, iii and iv) are


shown to indicate reproducibility.


Fig. 16. Essential fracture energy of (a) blown and (b) compression molded


LLDPE films.


P. Gupta et al. / Polymer 46 (2  5) 8819–8837 8833 Three stress–displacement curves (marked as i, ii and iii)


corresponding to three specimens (with the same ligament


length) are shown to indicate the reproducibility in the data.


The tear specimens satisfy the plane stress conditions [Eqs.


(3) and (4) in Section 2] and fail right after the yield and do


not undergo any plastic stretching that is characteristic of


the samples in a conventional tensile deformation test.


Further, the larger ligament length specimens had a larger


strain at break. This is due to the fact that at larger ligament


lengths, there is more material in the ligament that


undergoes deformation in comparison to that in the smaller


ligament lengths. However, the yield stress is practically the


same at both the ligament lengths, as expected. Stress–


displacement curves were obtained in a similar fashion for


the 25 mm thick blown films of ‘B’ and ‘O’ and all the


compression molded films. Based on the procedure outlined


in Section 2, the specific fracture energy, obtained by


integrating the stress–strain curve, was fitted by a linear


relationship when plotted against the ligament length. The


intercepts of these plots, then gave the essential work of


fracture. These results are shown in Fig. 16. For the blown


films (Fig. 16(a)) in each of the direction (MD or TD), the


essential work of fracture is observed to increase with


increasing short chain branch length, a result consistent with


the impact strength and Elmendorf tear resistance measure-


ments. As stated before, when a blown film specimen is


stretched along the MD, the crack propagates along the TD.


Therefore, when the specimen is being stretched along the


MD, the measured EWF is representative of the TD


direction. Consequently, the EWF along the TD is greater


than that along the MD. This is consistent with the tear


resistance being greater along the TD than along the MD


(Fig. 13(a)), which in turn is a manifestation of the preferred


lamellar orientation [13,14] (although only slight in this


study). For the compression molded quenched films


(Fig. 16(b)), the essential work of fracture of films based


on 1-butene was also observed to be less than that of the


1-hexene and 1-octene films. However, within the limits of


experimental error, the EWF results of the slow cooled films


do not indicate a strong dependence on the short chain


P. Gupta et al. / Polymer 46 (2  5) 8819–88378834 branch length. Thus, based on the results discussed so far, it


can be inferred that the mechanical properties of the films of


the three essentially identical linear low density polyethy-


lene copolymers based on 1-butene, 1-hexene and 1-octene


show a dependence on the length of short chain branch only


at high rates of deformation. This is summarized in Table 3, 
where at slower rates of deformation, the mechanical


properties were observed to be similar but quite different at


higher deformation rates. This is due to the fact that these


films are very similar in their molecular, rheological and


structural aspects that any effects due to the different short


chain lengths (present in small amounts of ca. 2.5–3 mol%)


do not get reflected at slower deformation rates. However, at


high deformation rates, these effects become prominent


such that the mechanical properties of films based on


1-butene were observed to be lower than those based on


1-hexene and 1-octene. Recalling that the primary objective


of this study was to further investigate the effect of the


length of short chain branch on the physical properties of


LLDPEs, the results presented here have shown that the


length of the short chain branch does play an important role


in influencing the mechanical properties of the LLDPEs in


agreement with earlier results [28] and furthermore


established that this effect is pronounced only at high rates


of deformation.


With regards to the origin of the effect of the difference in


short chain branch length on the mechanical properties


when measured at high rates of deformation, it seems


difficult to attribute this to the amorphous phase in view of


the low mole percentage of the branches and the fact that the


rheological behavior of at least the melt state shows no


significant differences. We did investigate the DMA


(dynamic mechanical analysis) behavior of the film


materials (data not shown) but did not find any distinct


variations between the materials although we admit that the


DMA tests were determined in the lower frequency range


( .  1–1  Hz). We conjecture that the origin of the effect of


the difference in short chain branch length on the


mechanical properties is coupled to its influence on the


deformation behavior of the crystalline phase. It has been


speculated [21,24,62,63] that a short chain branch prevents


the formation of crystalline regions in its immediate vicinity


leading to an increased probability of the main chain to


which it is attached to be incorporated into two different Table 3 
Dependence of mechanical properties on deformation rate


Test Estimated rate of deformat


Stress strain  .   2– .  8a 
Stress strain 1 
Dart impact  .1–1 
Elmendorf tear  .1– .7 
Spencer impact  .2–4 
Puncture resistance 5.1 
Tear resistance (EWF) 1 
a 12–51  mm/min (conventional crosshead speeds). lamellae, thereby establishing that portion of the chain as a


bridge or a tie molecule. If this supposition is true, then the


enhanced properties, associated with plastic deformation


(ductility, toughness, tear resistance, etc.), could be due to


an increasing number of tie molecules with increasing molar


content of short chain branches. However, this postulate


does not explain the EWF results on slow cooled films


where the essential work of fracture was not observed to be


strongly dependent on the branch length. For the three series


of films investigated in this study, viz. the blown, quenched


and slow cooled, the latter had the slowest rate of


crystallization and hence the highest opportunity to form a


more thermodynamically desirable equilibrium structure.


Thus, if tie molecule formation is favored at longer branch


lengths that consequently result in larger values of strength,


then this effect (‘O’w‘H’O‘B’) should be more pro-


nounced in the EWF results on slow cooled in comparison to


blown and quenched films. However, this is not the case.


Therefore, it is difficult to envision the increased formation


of tie molecules with increasing short chain branch length.


We, however, postulate that during the process of


deformation at high rates (1 m/s), the length of the short


chain branch may play an important role when it is pulled


into and potentially through the chain folded lamellar


regions as they deform. A very simplified schematic of this


concept is shown in Fig. 17. The magnitude of the resistance


offered by a shorter branch length undergoing deformation


through the crystalline regions could be lower than that


experienced by a longer branch length. Furthermore, for


LLDPEs that have only a few mol% (!5 mol%) of the short


chain branch comonomer, it is possible that this effect would


be pronounced at higher rates of deformation. This is


because at lower rates ( .   4 m/s) of deformation the


polymer chains have a longer time scale to respond to the


deformation, and consequently the resistance offered by


the branch during deformation may be independent of its


length. However, while this explanation is a hypothesis that


might explain the observed phenomena, it is yet to be


confirmed. Future investigations need to be conducted to


gain an in-depth understanding of the mechanism of


deformation and their rate dependence at the molecular


level.


In the past, some attempts to investigate the slow crack


growth in polyethylenes have been conducted, [64–66] 
ion (m/s) Properties


Very similar


Very different


Very different


Very different


Very different


Very different


Different


Fig. 17. A schematic showing the possible exclusion of the short chain branches from the chain folded regions leading to the formation of tie molecules. It is


hypothesized that the length of the short chain branch plays a role during tensile deformation at extreme strain rates. The dotted square on lamella 1 is enlarged


on the right.


P. Gupta et al. / Polymer 46 (2  5) 8819–8837 8835 however, investigating the specific behavior of the SCB


during deformation especially at a higher rate is not trivial


as the choice of a suitable experiment that will allow such a


characterization is difficult. Another potential way to


investigate such behavior at high deformation rates might


be by the dynamic modeling of the deformation phenomena


that could trace a given SCB as it is pulled through the


crystalline regions during the deformation at higher rate.


Certainly, as such modeling codes become more predictive,


the approach may help to address the distinct differences


observed in our study.


5. Summary


Three LLDPE resins synthesized by a single site


metallocene catalyst using 1-butene, 1-hexene, and


1-octene as co-monomers were characterized to be


essentially identical in terms of their molecular weight


and distribution melt rheology, density, crystallinity, and


short chain branching content. The resins were also very


homogenous with respect to the short chain branch


distribution across their MWD, although very slight


differences were observed in the TREF profiles of the


three resins. Therefore, this sample set allows us to evaluate


the exclusive influence exerted by the short chain branch


length on the physical properties of the resulting films;


many previous attempts by other workers to accomplish


the same objective have been confounded by samples


that differed substantially in their chemical composition.


The physical properties of isotropic compression molded


(slow-cooled and quenched) films as well as blown films of


the subject LLDPEs were investigated using a variety of


tests carried out at widely differing deformation rates. The


blown films made from these resins had low levels of


equivalent in-plane birefringence and the flat plate WAXS


measurements indicated low a-axis orientation along the


MD (Keller–Machin low stress row structure). Within the


compression molded quenched and slow cooled series,


the lamellar and spherulitic scale lengths as determined by


SAXS and SALS indicated very similar dimensions


corresponding to ‘B’, ‘H’ and ‘O’. The blown and


compression molded films formed from these resins were


also found to be similar to each other (within a given series,


be it blown, quenched or slow cooled) in terms of


crystallinity, and overall crystallization characteristics,


although, slightly broader melting endotherms of ‘H’ and


‘O’ in comparison to ‘B’ were observed in the first melting


profiles of compression molded slow cooled films.


However, the tensile properties of slow cooled ‘B’, ‘H’


and ‘O’at slow deformation rates (up to 51  mm/min) were


very similar, thereby clearly indicating that these slight


differences in the TREF behavior and differences in first


melting DSC profiles of compression molded slow cooled


films really do not play any role in governing the final


mechanical properties of the LLDPE films obtained at


slower deformation rates (up to 51  mm/min).


At higher deformation rates (1 m/s), however, the


breaking strength was observed to increase with increasing


short chain branch length for all the samples investigated


(blown, quenched and slow cooled). This is consistent with


an earlier study [28] utilizing the same polymers and films


P. Gupta et al. / Polymer 46 (2  5) 8819–88378836 investigated here, where the impact and tear strength of


blown films based on 1-octene and 1-hexene were found to


be considerably better than those of films based on 1-butene.


While the deformation rates in the above mentioned tests are


quite high, the rates change considerably during the


measurement. Therefore, the deformation characteristics


of the subject films were also studied in a well-defined and


controlled regime by analyzing the essential work of


fracture for the blown and compressed films. For the


blown films, the essential work of fracture was found to


increase systematically with increasing short chain branch


length. For the compression molded films, the 1-hexene and


1-octene based films performed better than the 1-butene


films. In general, the mechanical properties of 1-octene


based systems were somewhat enhanced relative to those


based on 1-hexene. However, this is not an all inclusive


statement, as the compression molded films of ‘O’


performed equally to ‘H’ in high speed tensile (breaking


strength at 1 m/s), puncture resistance and EWF tear tests.


From these results, it can be concluded that the length of the


short chain branch length plays a crucial role in determining


the mechanical properties of LLDPE, especially at high


deformation rates. It is hypothesized that the magnitude of


the resistance offered by a shorter branch length undergoing


deformation through the crystalline regions could be lower


than that offered by a longer branch length. However,


further studies to gain a better understanding of the


underlying physical process of deformation need to be


conducted.


Acknowledgements


The financial support of the US Army Research


Laboratory and US Army Research Office under contract/-


grant number DAAD19- 2-1- 275. Macromolecular Archi-


tecture for Performance (MAP) MURI is gratefully


acknowledged. The authors would like to thank Chevron


Phillips Chemical Company and Procter and Gamble


Company for their collaboration and support.


References


[1] Natta GJ. Polym Sci 1959;34:531–49. 
[2] Lai S, Knight GW. Proceedings of the 51st annual technical


conference. New Orleans, LA, USA: Society of Plastics Engineers;


1993, p. 1188. 
[3] Montagna AA, Floyd JC. Hydrocarbon Process, Int Ed 1994;73: 
57–6 . 
[4] Benedikt GM, Goodall BL. Metallocene catalyzed polymers—


materials, properties, processing and markets. Ont., Canada:


ChemTec Publishing; 1999. 
[5] Benedikt GM. Metallocene technology in commercial applications.


Ont., Canada: ChemTec Publishing; 1998. 
[6] Sukhadia AM. J Plast Film Sheeting 1998;14:54–75. 
[7] Bubeck RA, Baker HM. Polymer 1982;23:168 –4. 
[8] Maddams WF, Preedy JE. J Appl Polym Sci 1978;22:2721–37. 
[9] Maddams WF, Preedy JE. J Appl Polym Sci 1978;22:2739–49. 
[1 ] Maddams WF, Preedy JE. J Appl Polym Sci 1978;22:2751–9. 
[11] White JL, Cakmak M. Adv Polym Tech 1988;8:27. 
[12] Pazur RJ, Prud’homme RE. Macromolecules 1996;29:119–28. 
[13] Krishnaswamy RK, Lamborn MJ. Polym Eng Sci 2   ;4 :2385–96. 
[14] Krishnaswamy RK, Sukhadia AM. Polymer 2   ;41:92 5–17. 
[15] Haber A, Kamal MR. Proceedings of the 45th annual technical


conference, Los Angeles, CA, USA: Society of Plastics Engineers;


1987; p. 446. 
[16] Lee C, Peat I, Wild L, Fernando A. Proceedings of the 46th annual


technical conference, Atlanta, GA, USA: Society of Plastics Engin-


eers; 1988; p. 183. 
[17] Firdaus V, Tong PP. J Plast Film Sheeting 1992;8:333–4 . 
[18] Crotty VJ, Firdaus V. Proceedings of the 51st annual technical


conference, New Orleans, LA, USA; Society of Plastics Engineers;


1993; p. 21 . 
[19] Patel RM, Butler TI, Walton KL, Knight GW. Polym Eng Sci 1994; 
34:15 6–14. 
[2 ] Cady LD. Plast Eng 1987;43:25–7. 
[21] Liu TM, Baker WE. Polym Eng Sci 1992;32:944–55. 
[22] Kim Y-M, Park J-K. J Appl Polym Sci 1996;61:2315–24. 
[23] Wolfe AR. Plastics pipes X: Plastics pipeline systems for the


millennium, conference papers, Goeteborg, September 14–17, 1998. 
p. 95–1 2. 
[24] Kale LT, Plumley TA, Patel RM, Redwine OD, Jain P. J Plast Film


Sheeting 1995;12:27–39. 
[25] Alizadeh A, Richardson L, Xu J, McCartney S, Marand H,


Cheung YW, et al. Macromolecules 1999;32:6221–35. 
[26] Alamo RG, Viers BD, Mandelkern L. Macromolecules 1993;26: 
574 –7. 
[27] Kennedy MA, Peacock AJ, Failla MD, Lucas JC, Mandelkern L.


Macromolecules 1995;28:14 7–21. 
[28] Sukhadia AM, Welch MB, Krishnaswamy RK, Palackal SJ. Proceed-


ings of the 58th annual technical conference. vol. 2. Orlando, FL,


USA: Society of Plastics Engineers; 2   . p. 1578–82. 
[29] Ferrer-Balas D, Maspoch ML, Martinez AB, Santana OO. Polymer


2   ;42:1697–7 5. 
[3 ] Chan WYF, Williams JG. Polymer 1994;35:1666–72. 
[31] Maspoch ML, Ferrer-Balas D, Gordillo A, Satana OO, Martinez AB.


J Appl Polym Sci 1999;73:177–87. 
[32] Maspoch ML, Perez-Gamez GA, Sanchez-Soto M, Velasco JI.


Polymer 2  2;43:4177–83. 
[33] Ferrer-Balas D, Maspoch ML, Martinez AB, Ching E, Li RKY,


Mai Y-W. Polymer 2  1;42:2665–74. 
[34] Cotterell B, Reddel JK. Int J Fract 1977;13:267–77. 
[35] Broberg KB. Int J Fract 1968;4:11. 
[36] Luna P, Bernal C, Cisilino A, Frontini P, Cotterell B, Mai Y-W.


Polymer 2  3;44:1145–5 . 
[37] Wu J, Mai Y-W, Cotterell B. J Mater Sci 1993;28:3373–84. 
[38] Paton CA, Hashemi S. J Mater Sci 1992;27:2279–9 . 
[39] Marchal Y, Delannay F. Mater Sci Tech 1998;14:1163–8. 
[4 ] Mai Y-W, Powell P. J Polym Sci, Part B: Polym Phys 1991;29: 
785–93. 
[41] Bird RB, Armstrong RC, Hassager O. Dynamics of polymeric liquids.


Fluid mechanics. vol. 1 1977. 
[42] Rohlfing DC, Janzen J. Metallocene-based Polyolefins 2   ;2: 
419–34. 
[43] Hsieh ET, Tso CC, Byers JD, Johnson TW, Fu Q, Cheng SZD.


J Macromol Sci Phys 1997;B36:615–28. 
[44] DesLauriers PJ, Rohlfing DC, Hsieh ET. Polymer 2  2;43:159–7 . 
[45] Sukhadia AM. J Plast Film Sheeting 1994;1 :213. 
[46] Failla M, Alamo RG, Mandelkern L. Polym Test 1992;11:151–9. 
[47] Glotin M, Mandelkern L. Colloid Polym Sci 1982;26 :182–92. 
[48] Hansen EW, Kristiansen PE, Pedersen B. J Phys Chem B 1998;1 2: 
5444–5 . 
[49] Pake GE. J Chem Phys 1948;16:327–36. 
[5 ] Look DC, Lowe IJ, Northby JA. J Chem Phys 1966;44:3441–52. 
P. Gupta et al. / Polymer 46 (2  5) 8819–8837 8837 [51] Hsieh ET, Randall JC. Macromolecules 1982;15:14 2–6. 
[52] Hsieh ET, Randall JC. Macromolecules 1982;15:353–6 . 
[53] Fonseca CA, Harrison IR. Thermochim Acta 1998;313:37–41. 
[54] Yau WW, Gillespie D. Polymer 2  1;42:8947–58. 
[55] Tso CC, DesLauriers PJ. Polymer 2  4;45:2657–63. 
[56] Pepper RE, Samuels RJ. In Encyclopedia of Polymer Science and


Engineering, Wiley, NY, 1988;14:261–98. 
[57] Hamada F, Wunderlich B, Sumida T, Hayashi S, Nakajima A. J Phys


Chem 1968;72:178–85. 
[58] Yoon DY, Cho TY, Shin EJ, Jeong W, Heck B, Strobl G, et al. Polym


Mater Sci Eng 2  4;91:242–3. 
[59] Stein RS, Plaza A. J Polym Sci 196 ;45:519–2 . 
[6 ] Clark RJ, Miller RL, Stein RS, Wilson PR. J Polym Sci 196 ;42: 
275–7. 
[61] Wilkes GL, Stein RS. Structure and properties of oriented polymers.


2nd ed 1997. 
[62] Chum PS, Kruper WJ, Guest MJ. J Adv Mater 2   ;12:1759–67. 
[63] Bubeck RA. Mater Sci Eng 2  2;39:1–28. 
[64] Herman JN, Biesenberger JA. Polym Eng Sci 1966;6:341–8. 
[65] Clutton EQ, Rose LJ, Capaccio G. Plast Rubber Compos Process Appl


1998;27:478–82. 
[66] Huang YL, Brown N. J Polym Sci, Part B: Polym Phys 1991;29: 
